Data quality overview guide (#409)
astronomer/airflow-guides: guides/data-quality.md

- **Row**: e.g. comparing the values in several columns for each row or ensuring that there are no mutually exclusive values present in the same row.
- **Table**: e.g. checking against a template schema to verify that it has not changed or checking that a table has a minimum row count.
- **Over several tables**: e.g. data parity checks across several tables or creating logical checks like making sure a customer marked as 'inactive' has no purchases listed in any of the other tables.

It is also important to distinguish the two types of Data Integrity Control:

- **Flow Control**: Monitors incoming data on a record-by-record basis and will sometimes prevent single records that fail certain data quality checks from entering the database. We will not cover flow control in this guide.
- **Static Control**: Runs checks on Spark or Pandas dataframes, or on existing tables in a database. These checks can be performed anywhere in a typical ETL pipeline and might halt the pipeline in case of a failed check to prevent further processing of data with quality issues. In this guide we will only cover static data quality checks.

### Location and downstream effects of data quality checks

> Data quality checks can be run at different times within a data pipeline or Airflow environment. It often makes sense to test them in their own DAG and later incorporate them into your ETL pipelines to be able to make downstream behavior dependent on the outcome of selected data quality checks.

Reviewer: Yes, that makes sense to me. We don't want to limit it to ETL only, but I think ETL is a great example that most users can relate to.

> Data quality checks can be run at different times within a data pipeline or Airflow environment. It often makes sense to test them in their own DAG and later incorporate them into your ETL pipelines to be able to make downstream behavior dependent on the outcome of selected data quality checks.

Author: Made the changes 🙂

Within the ETL pipeline, data quality checks can be placed in several different locations as shown in the DAG graph below:

- Before the transform step (`data_quality_check_1`)
- After the transform step (`data_quality_check_2`)
- Branching off from a step (`data_quality_check_3`)

![Different locations for data quality checks in an ETL pipeline](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/data-quality/dq_checks_locations_example_graph.png)

> It is common practice to define further downstream actions depending on the results of data quality checks (`post_check_action_1` and `post_check_action_2`), or in [`callbacks`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/logging-monitoring/callbacks.html).

Reviewer 2: Are these downstream actions only triggered when an error occurs? We should be specific about that. Also can we be more Airflow specific and say "tasks" here?

> These actions often include alerting data professionals via [error notifications](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/error-notifications-in-airflow/), for example with an email or in a Slack channel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These tasks can alert data professionals with [error notifications](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/error-notifications-in-airflow/), such as an email or a Slack message.
```

> When implementing data quality checks, consider how a check success or failure should influence downstream dependencies. [Trigger Rules](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/managing-dependencies/#trigger-rules) are especially useful in managing operator dependencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When implementing data quality checks, consider how a check success or failure should influence downstream dependencies. [Trigger Rules](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/managing-dependencies/#trigger-rules) are especially useful for managing operator dependencies.
```

## When to implement data quality checks

When implementing data quality checks, it is important to consider the tradeoffs between the upfront work of implementing checks vs. the cost of downstream issues caused by data with bad quality.

> Good reasons to start thinking about data quality checks are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You might need to implement data quality checks if:
```

- Downstream models serve customer-facing results that could be compromised in the case of a data quality issue.
- There are data quality concerns where an issue might not be immediately obvious to the data professional using the data.

> ## Tools

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Data quality tools
```

There are multiple open source tools that can be used to check data quality from an Airflow DAG. While we list the most commonly used tools here, we will focus on the two tools that also integrate with OpenLineage:

> - **[SQL Check operators](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-sql-data-quality-tutorial)**: A group of operators allowing the user to define data quality checks in Python dictionaries and SQL directly from within the DAG.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **[SQL Check operators](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-sql-data-quality-tutorial)**: A group of operators that you can use to define data quality checks in Python dictionaries and SQL from within your DAGs.
```

> - **[Great Expectations](https://greatexpectations.io/)**: An open source data validation framework where checks are defined in JSON format. Airflow offers a provider package including the `GreatExpectationsOperator` for easy integration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **[Great Expectations](https://greatexpectations.io/)**: An open source data validation framework where checks are defined in JSON. Airflow offers a provider package including the `GreatExpectationsOperator` for easy integration.
```

Other tools that can be used for data quality checks include:

- **[Soda](https://docs.soda.io/)**: An open source data validation framework that uses YAML to define checks which can be run in Airflow using the `BashOperator`. Soda also offers the ability to write any custom checks using SQL.

> - **[dbt test](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/building-a-dbt-project/tests)**: dbt supports a testing framework on models using the `dbt test` CLI command, which can be run in Airflow with the `BashOperator` or `PythonOperator`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **[dbt test](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/building-a-dbt-project/tests)**: A testing framework for models using the `dbt test` CLI command, which you can run in Airflow with the `BashOperator` or `PythonOperator`.
```

### Choosing a tool

Which tool to choose comes down to individual business needs and preferences. We recommend using SQL Check operators if you want to:

> - Write checks without needing to set up software additionally to Airflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Write checks without needing to set up software in addition to Airflow.
```

- Write checks as Python dictionaries and in SQL.

> - Be able to use any SQL statement that returns a single row of booleans as a data quality check.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Use any SQL statement that returns a single row of booleans as a data quality check.
```

- Implement many different downstream dependencies depending on the outcome of different checks.

> - Be able to have full observability of which checks failed from within Airflow task logs, including the full SQL statements of failed checks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Have full observability of which checks failed from within Airflow task logs, including the full SQL statements of failed checks.
```

We recommend using a data validation framework like Great Expectations or Soda if:

- You want to collect the results of your data quality checks in a central place.
- You prefer to write checks in JSON (Great Expectations) or YAML (Soda) format.

> - Most or all of your checks can be implemented by the predefined checks of the solution of your choice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Most or all of your checks can be implemented by the predefined checks in the solution of your choice.
```

### SQL Check operators

> **Note**: You can find more details and examples on SQL Check operators as well as example logs in the ['Airflow Data Quality Checks with SQL Operators' guide](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-sql-data-quality-tutorial/).

SQL Check operators execute a SQL statement that results in a set of booleans. A result of `True` leads to the check passing and the task being labelled as successful. A result of `False`, or any error when the statement is executed, leads to a failure of the task. Before using any of the operators, you need to define the [connection](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/connections/) to your data storage from the Airflow UI or via an external secrets manager.

The SQL Check operators work with any backend solution that accepts SQL queries and supports Airflow, and differ in what kind of data quality checks they can perform and how they are defined.

The `SQLColumnCheckOperator` and `SQLTableCheckOperator` are part of the [Common SQL provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/common-sql). The other SQL Check operators are built into core Airflow and do not require separate package installation.

> - [`SQLColumnCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/common-sql/modules/sqlcolumncheckoperator): Allows quick definition of many checks on whole columns of a table using a Python dictionary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`SQLColumnCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/common-sql/modules/sqlcolumncheckoperator): Can quickly define checks on columns of a table using a Python dictionary.
```

- [`SQLCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/sqlcheckoperator): Can be used with any SQL statement that returns a single row of booleans.
- [`SQLIntervalCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/sqlintervalcheckoperator): Runs checks against historical data.
- [`SQLValueCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/sqlvaluecheckoperator): Compares the result of a SQL query against a value with or without a tolerance window.
- [`SQLThresholdCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/sqlthresholdcheckoperator): Compares the result of a SQL query against upper and lower thresholds which may also be described as SQL queries.

The logs from SQL Check operators can be found in the regular Airflow task logs.

### Great Expectations

> **Note**: You can find more information on how to use Great Expectations with Airflow in the ['Integrating Airflow and Great Expectations'](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-great-expectations/) guide.

> Great Expectations is an open source data validation framework that allows the user to define data quality checks called Expectation Suites as a JSON file. The checks can be run in a DAG using the [`GreatExpectationsOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations/modules/greatexpectationsoperator).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Great Expectations is an open source data validation framework that allows the user to define data quality checks as a JSON file. The checks, also known as Expectation Suites, can be run in a DAG using the [`GreatExpectationsOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations/modules/greatexpectationsoperator).
```

> **Note** All currently available expectations can be viewed on the [Great Expectations website](https://greatexpectations.io/expectations).

To use Great Expectations, you will need to install the open source Great Expectations package and set up a Great Expectations project with at least one instance of each of the following components:

- Data Context
- Datasource
- Expectation Suite
- Checkpoint

> The Great Expectations documentation offers a [step-by-step tutorial](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/tutorials/getting_started/tutorial_overview) for this setup. Additionally, to use Great Expectations with Airflow, the [Great Expectations provider package](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations) has to be installed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Great Expectations documentation offers a [step-by-step tutorial](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/tutorials/getting_started/tutorial_overview) for this setup. Additionally, to use Great Expectations with Airflow, you have to install the [Great Expectations provider package](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations).
```

> When using Great Expectations, Airflow task logs will only show whether the suite passed or failed. To get a detailed report on the checks that were run and their results, you can refer to the html files in `great_expecations/uncommitted/data_docs/local_site/validations`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using Great Expectations, Airflow task logs show only whether the suite passed or failed. To get a detailed report on the checks that were run and their results, you can view to the HTML files in `great_expecations/uncommitted/data_docs/local_site/validations`.
```
It's unclear how you actually run a local site to see this validation information. Is there a GE doc we can point to for this information instead?

## Data lineage and data quality

In complex data ecosystems, lineage can be a powerful addition to data quality checks, especially for investigating what data from which origins caused a check to fail.

> **Note**: For more information on data lineage and details on how to set up OpenLineage with Airflow please see the ['OpenLineage and Airflow' guide](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-openlineage/).

Both SQL Check operators and the `GreatExpectationsOperator` have OpenLineage extractors. If you are working with open source tools, you can view the resulting lineage from the extractors using Marquez.

> The output from the `SQLColumnCheckOperator` will contain each individual check and whether or not it succeeded:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The output from the `SQLColumnCheckOperator` contains each individual check and whether or not it succeeded:
```

![Marquez SQLColumnCheckOperator](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/data-quality/marquez_sql_column_check.png)

> For the `GreatExpectationsOperator`, OpenLineage receives whether or not the whole Expectation suite succeeded or failed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the `GreatExpectationsOperator`, OpenLineage receives whether or not the whole Expectation Suite succeeded or failed:
```

![Marquez GreatExpectationsOperator](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/data-quality/marquez_ge.png)

## Example: Comparing SQL Check operators and Great Expectations

This example shows the steps necessary to perform the same set of data quality checks with SQL Check operators and with Great Expectations.

The checks performed for both tools are:

> - "MY_DATE_COL" has only unique values
> - "MY_DATE_COL" has only values between 2017-01-01 and 2022-01-01
> - "MY_TEXT_COL" has no null values
> - "MY_TEXT_COL" has at least 10 distinct values
> - "MY_NUM_COL" has a minimum value between 90 and 110
> - `example_table` has at least 1000 rows
> - The the value in each row of "MY_COL_1" plus the value of the same row in "MY_COL_2" is equal to 100
> - "MY_COL_3" contains only the values `val1`, `val2`, `val3` and `val4`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- "MY_DATE_COL" has only unique values.
- "MY_DATE_COL" has only values between 2017-01-01 and 2022-01-01.
- "MY_TEXT_COL" has no null values.
- "MY_TEXT_COL" has at least 10 distinct values.
- "MY_NUM_COL" has a minimum value between 90 and 110.
- `example_table` has at least 1000 rows.
- The value in each row of "MY_COL_1" plus the value of the same row in "MY_COL_2" is equal to 100.
- "MY_COL_3" contains only the values `val1`, `val2`, `val3` and `val4`.
```

### Example: SQL Check operators

> The example DAG below consists of 3 tasks:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The example DAG below consists of 4 tasks:
```

> - First, the `SQLColumnCheckOperator` is used to perform checks on several columns in the target table.
> - Next, two `SQLTableCheckOperator`s perform one check each that involves several columns or the whole table respectively.
> - Finally, the `SQLCheckOperator` is used to make sure a categorical variable is set to one of 4 options.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- First, the`SQLColumnCheckOperator` is used to perform checks on several columns in the target table.
- Next, two `SQLTableCheckOperators` perform one check each. One operator checks several columns, while the other checks the entire table.
- Finally, the `SQLCheckOperator` is used to make sure a categorical variable is set to one of 4 options.
```

        table=example_table,
        checks={
            "my_column_comparison_check": {
                "check_statement": "MY_COL_1 + MY_COL_2 = 100"
            }
        }
    )

    # SQLCheckOperator example: ensure categorical values in MY_COL_3
    # are one of a list of 4 options
    check_val_in_list = SQLCheckOperator(
        task_id="check_today_val_in_bounds",
        conn_id=example_connection,
        sql="""
                WITH

                not_in_list AS (

                SELECT COUNT(*) as count_not_in_list
                FROM {{ params.db_to_query }}.{{ params.schema }}.\
                     {{ params.table }}
                WHERE {{ params.col }} NOT IN {{ params.options_tuple }}
                )

                SELECT
                    CASE WHEN count_not_in_list = 0 THEN 1
                    ELSE 0
                    END AS testresult
                FROM not_in_list
            """,
        params={"db_to_query": example_database,
                "schema": example_schema,
                "table": example_table,
                "col": "MY_COL_3",
                "options_tuple": "('val1', 'val2', 'val3', 'val4')"
                }

>     )

Reviewer 2: Does this DAG need its dependencies defined?

```

### Example: Great Expectations

> The following example runs the same data quality checks as the SQL Check operators example against the same database. After setting up the Great Expectations instance with all four components, the checks can be defined in JSON format to form one Expectation Suite.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example runs the same data quality checks as the SQL Check operators example against the same database. After setting up the Great Expectations instance with all four components, the checks can be defined in a JSON file to form an Expectation Suite.
```

      "kwargs": {
        "column": "MY_NUM_COL",
        "min_value": 90,
        "max_value": 110
      },
      "meta": {}
    },
    {
      "expectation_context": {
        "description": "the table has at least 1000 rows"
      },
      "expectation_type": "expect_table_row_count_to_be_between",
      "ge_cloud_id": null,
      "kwargs": {
        "min_value": 1000
      },
      "meta": {}
    },
    {
      "expectation_context": {
        "description": "for each row MY_COL_1 plus MY_COL_2 is = 100"
      },
      "expectation_type": "expect_multicolumn_sum_to_equal",
      "ge_cloud_id": null,
      "kwargs": {
        "column_list": ["MY_COL_1", "MY_COL_2"],
        "sum_total": 100
      },
      "meta": {}
    },
    {
      "expectation_context": {
        "description": "MY_COL_3 only contains values from a defined set"
      },
      "expectation_type": "expect_column_values_to_be_in_set",
      "ge_cloud_id": null,
      "kwargs": {
        "column": "MY_COL_3",
        "value_set": ["val1", "val2", "val3", "val4"]
      },
      "meta": {}
    }
  ],
  "ge_cloud_id": null,
  "meta": {
    "great_expectations_version": "0.15.14"
  }
}
```

> The corresponding DAG code shows how all checks are run within one task using the `GreatExpectationsOperator`. Only the root directory of the data context and the checkpoint name have to be provided. It is important to note that to use XComs with the `GreatExpectationsOperator` it is necessary to enable XCOM pickling as described in the more in-depth [Great Expectations](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-great-expectations/) guide.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The corresponding DAG code shows how all checks are run within one task using the `GreatExpectationsOperator`. Only the root directory of the data context and the checkpoint name have to be provided. It is important to note that to use XComs with the `GreatExpectationsOperator` you must enable XCOM pickling as described in the [Great Expectations](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-great-expectations/) guide.
```

```python
from airflow import DAG
from datetime import datetime

from great_expectations_provider.operators.great_expectations import (
  GreatExpectationsOperator
)

with DAG(
    schedule_interval=None,
    start_date=datetime(2022,7,1),
    dag_id="ge_example_dag",
    catchup=False,
) as dag:

    # task running the Expectation Suite defined in the JSON above
    ge_test = GreatExpectationsOperator(
        task_id="ge_test",
        data_context_root_dir="/usr/local/airflow/include/great_expectations",
        checkpoint_name="my_checkpoint",
        do_xcom_push=False
    )
```

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Conclusion
```
This conclusion seems more specific to the "Tools" section vs. the entire guide.

The growth of tools designed to perform data quality checks reflect the importance of ensuring data quality in production workflows. Commitment to data quality requires in-depth planning and collaboration between data professionals. What kind of data quality your organization needs will depend on your unique use case, which you can explore using the steps outlined in this guide.

SQL Check operators offer a way to define your checks directly from within the DAG, with no other tools necessary. If you run many checks on different databases, you may benefit from using a more complex testing solution like Great Expectations or Soda.

> No matter which tool is used, data quality checks can be orchestrated from within an Airflow DAG, which makes downstream actions depending on the outcome of the checks possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
No matter which tool is used, data quality checks can be orchestrated from within an Airflow DAG, which makes it possible to trigger downstream actions depending on the outcome of your checks.
```

---
title: "Data quality and Airflow"
description: "Check the quality of your data using Airflow"

> date: 2022-08-12T00:00:00.000Z

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2022-08-10T00:00:00.000Z
```

> description: "Improve the quality of your data using Airflow"
> date: 2022-07-12T00:00:00.000Z

Author: ```suggestion
description: "Check the quality of your data using Airflow"
date: 2022-08-12T00:00:00.000Z
```

## Assumed knowledge

To get the most out of this guide, you should have knowledge of:

- What Airflow is and when to use it. See [Introduction to Apache Airflow](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/intro-to-airflow).
- Airflow operators. See [Operators 101](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/what-is-an-operator).
- Airflow connections. See [Managing your Connections in Apache Airflow](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/connections/).
- Relational databases. See [Relational database on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relational_database).

## Data quality essentials

What is considered "good" in terms of data quality varies based on your use case. Defining quality criteria for a given collection of datasets is often a task requiring collaboration with all data professionals involved in each step of the pipeline.

Generally speaking, though, the data quality check process can be summarized in these steps:

1. Assess where and in what formats relevant data is stored, and where it moves along your pipeline. This step can be assisted by using a data lineage tool.
2. Gather the data quality criteria from data professionals using the data.

> 3. Determine the quality checks to run on each level of data.

Author: ```suggestion
3. Determine the quality checks to run different components of the dataset.
```

4. Determine where those quality checks should occur in your pipeline.
5. Determine what happens when a check fails.

> 6. Choose a data quality tool (see the "Tools" section of this guide for more information).

Author: ```suggestion
6. Choose a data quality tool (see the "Data quality tools" section of this guide for more information).
```

7. Write the checks.
8. Test the checks.

### Types of data quality checks

> Data quality checks can be run on different levels:

Author: ```suggestion
Data quality checks can be run on different components of the dataset:
```

- **Column**: Common checks include confirming uniqueness of a key column, restricting the amount of `NULL` values that are allowed, defining logical bounds for numeric or date columns, and defining valid options for categorical variables.
- **Row**: Common checks include comparing the values in several columns for each row, and ensuring that there are no mutually exclusive values present in the same row.
- **Table**: Common checks include checking against a template schema to verify that it has not changed, and checking that a table has a minimum row count.
- **Over several tables**: Common checks include data parity checks across several tables. You can also create logical checks like making sure a customer marked as `inactive` has no purchases listed in any of the other tables.

> It is also important to distinguish between the two types of data integrity control:

Author: ```suggestion
It is also important to distinguish between the two types of control in data quality:
```

### Choosing a tool

Which tool to choose comes down to individual business needs and preferences. We recommend using SQL Check operators if you want to:

- Write checks without needing to set up software in addition to Airflow.
- Write checks as Python dictionaries and in SQL.
- Use any SQL statement that returns a single row of booleans as a data quality check.
- Implement many different downstream dependencies depending on the outcome of different checks.
- Have full observability of which checks failed from within Airflow task logs, including the full SQL statements of failed checks.

We recommend using a data validation framework like Great Expectations or Soda if:

- You want to collect the results of your data quality checks in a central place.
- You prefer to write checks in JSON (Great Expectations) or YAML (Soda) format.
- Most or all of your checks can be implemented by the predefined checks in the solution of your choice.
- You want your data quality checks abstracted away from the DAG code.

> > **Note**: Currently only SQL Check operators and Great Expectations offer data lineage extraction.

Author: ```suggestion
> **Note**: Currently only SQL Check operators and the `GreatExpectationsOperator` offer data lineage extraction.
```

### SQL Check operators

> **Note**: You can find more details and examples on SQL Check operators as well as example logs in the ['Airflow Data Quality Checks with SQL Operators' guide](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-sql-data-quality-tutorial/).

> SQL Check operators execute a SQL statement that results in a set of booleans. A result of `True` leads to the check passing and the task being labelled as successful. A result of `False`, or any error when the statement is executed, leads to a failure of the task. Before using any of the operators, you need to define the [connection](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/connections/) to your data storage from the Airflow UI or via an external secrets manager.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SQL Check operators execute a SQL statement that results in a set of booleans. A result of `True` leads to the check passing and the task being labeled as successful. A result of `False`, or any error when the statement is executed, leads to a failure of the task. Before using any of the operators, you need to define the [connection](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/connections/) to your data storage from the Airflow UI or via an external secrets manager.
```
Today I learned another discrepancy between US English and rest-of-the-world English! Since we are using US spelling in our content, I'm making this suggestion even though it's technically correct.

Author: Yeah I had no idea about that either. The versions are a mess already in my head because learning rest of the world English in school but mostly consuming US media, I end up googling "s or z" a lot 😅

Great Expectations is an open source data validation framework that allows the user to define data quality checks as a JSON file. The checks, also known as Expectation Suites, can be run in a DAG using the [`GreatExpectationsOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations/modules/greatexpectationsoperator).

> **Note** All currently available expectations can be viewed on the [Great Expectations website](https://greatexpectations.io/expectations).

To use Great Expectations, you will need to install the open source Great Expectations package and set up a Great Expectations project with at least one instance of each of the following components:

- Data Context
- Datasource
- Expectation Suite
- Checkpoint

The Great Expectations documentation offers a [step-by-step tutorial](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/tutorials/getting_started/tutorial_overview) for this setup. Additionally, to use Great Expectations with Airflow, you have to install the [Great Expectations provider package](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations).

> When using Great Expectations, Airflow task logs show only whether the suite passed or failed. To get a [detailed report](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/terms/data_docs/) on the checks that were run and their results, you can view the HTML files located in `great_expecations/uncommitted/data_docs/local_site/validations` in any browser.

Author: ```suggestion
When using Great Expectations, Airflow task logs show only whether the suite passed or failed. To get a [detailed report](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/terms/data_docs/) on the checks that were run and their results, you can view the HTML files located in the `great_expecations/uncommitted/data_docs/local_site/validations` directory in any browser.
```

Good reasons to start thinking about data quality checks are:

- Downstream models serve customer-facing results that could be compromised in the case of a data quality issue.
- There are data quality concerns where an issue might not be immediately obvious to the data professional using the data.

## Tools

There are different tools that can be used to check data quality from an Airflow DAG. In this section we will highlight the two tools that also integrate with OpenLineage with concrete examples:

- **[SQL Check operators](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-sql-data-quality-tutorial)**: A group of operators allowing the user to define data quality checks in python dictionaries and SQL directly from within the DAG.
- **[GreatExpectations](https://greatexpectations.io/)**: An open source data validation framework where checks are defined in json format. Airflow offers a provider package including the `GreatExpectationsOperator` for easy integration.

Other tools that can be used for data quality checks are:

> - [Soda](https://docs.soda.io/): An open source data validation framework that uses YAML to define checks which can be kicked off using the `BashOperator`. Soda also offers the ability to write any custom checks using SQL.

Author: Yeah I agree this one should be published first. I made a note to update the link once the soda guide is up 🙂

- [dbt test](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/building-a-dbt-project/tests): dbt supports a testing framework on models using the `dbt test` CLI command, which can be run in Airflow with a `BashOperator` or `Python Operator`.

### Choosing a tool

Which tool to choose comes down to individual business needs and preferences. We recommend to use SQL Check operators if you want to:

- Write checks without needing to set up software additionally to Airflow.
- Write checks as Python dictionaries and in SQL.
- Be able to use any SQL statement that returns a single row of booleans as a data quality check.
- Implement many different downstream dependencies depending on the outcome of different checks.
- Be able to have full observability of which checks failed from within Airflow task logs, including the full SQL statements of failed checks.

We recommend to use a data validation framework like GreatExpectations or Soda if:

- You want to collect the results of your data quality checks in a central place.

> - You prefer to write checks in JSON (GreatExpectations) or YAML (Soda) format.

Author: Two words is consistent with their website 🙂

- [`SQLTableCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/common-sql/modules/sqltablecheckoperator): Can run aggregated and non-aggregated statements involving several columns of a table.
- [`SQLCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/sqlcheckoperator): Can be used with any SQL statement that returns a single row of booleans.
- [`SQLIntervalCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/sqlintervalcheckoperator): Runs checks against historical data.
- [`SQLValueCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/sqlvaluecheckoperator): Compares the result of a SQL query against a value with or without a tolerance window.
- [`SQLThresholdCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/sqlthresholdcheckoperator): Compares the result of a SQL query against upper and lower thresholds which may also be described as SQL queries.

The logs from SQL Check operators can be found in the regular Airflow task logs.

### GreatExpectations

> > **Note**: You can find more information on how to use GreatExpectations with Airflow in the ['Integrating Airflow and Great Expectations'](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-great-expectations/) guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note**: You can find more information on how to use Great Expectations with Airflow in the ['Integrating Airflow and Great Expectations'](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-great-expectations/) guide.
```

> GreatExpectations is an open source data validation framework that allows the user to define data quality checks called Expectations Suites as a json file. The checks can be run in a DAG using the [`GreatExpectationsOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations/modules/greatexpectationsoperator).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Great Expectations is an open source data validation framework that allows the user to define data quality checks called Expectation Suites as a json file. The checks can be run in a DAG using the [`GreatExpectationsOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations/modules/greatexpectationsoperator).
```

> **Note** All currently available expectations can be viewed on the [GreatExpectations website](https://greatexpectations.io/expectations).

> To use GreatExpectations you will need to install the open source GreatExpectations software and set up a GreatExpectations project with at least one instance of each of the following components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use Great Expectations, you will need to install the open source Great Expectations package and set up a Great Expectations project with at least one instance of each of the following components:
```

- Data Context
- Datasource
- Expectation Suite
- Checkpoint

> The GreatExpectations documentation offers a [step-by-step tutorial](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/tutorials/getting_started/tutorial_overview) for this setup. Additionally the [GreatExpectations provider package](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations) has to be installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Great Expectations documentation offers a [step-by-step tutorial](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/tutorials/getting_started/tutorial_overview) for this setup. Additionally, to use Great Expectations with Airflow, the [Great Expectations provider package](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations) has to be installed.
```

> When using GreatExpectations, Airflow task logs will only show whether the suite passed or failed. To get a detailed report on the checks that were run and their results you can refer to the html files in `great_expecations/uncommitted/data_docs/local_site/validations`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using Great Expectations, Airflow task logs will only show whether the suite passed or failed. To get a detailed report on the checks that were run and their results, you can refer to the html files in `great_expecations/uncommitted/data_docs/local_site/validations`.
```

> ## OpenLineage and Data Quality

Reviewer: Should we title this "Data lineage and data quality" to be more high level?

> In complex data ecosystems lineage can be a powerful addition to data quality checks, especially for investigating what data from which origins caused a check to fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In complex data ecosystems, lineage can be a powerful addition to data quality checks, especially for investigating what data from which origins caused a check to fail.
```

> > **Note**: For more information on Data Lineage and details on how to set up OpenLineage with Airflow please see the ['Open Lineage and Airflow' guide](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-openlineage/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note**: For more information on data lineage and details on how to set up OpenLineage with Airflow please see the ['Open Lineage and Airflow' guide](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-openlineage/).
```

> Both SQL Check operators and the GreatExpectationsOperator have Data Lineage extractors that work with OpenLineage and Marquez.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both SQL Check operators and the GreatExpectationsOperator have OpenLineage extractors. If you are working with open source tools, you can view the resulting lineage from the extractors using Marquez.
```

The output from the SQLColumnCheckOperator will contain each individual check and whether or not it succeeded:

![Marquez SQLColumnCheckOperator](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/data-quality/marquez_sql_column_check.png)

For the GreatExpectationsOperator, OpenLineage receives whether or not the whole Expectation suite succeeded or failed:

![Marquez GreatExpectationsOperator](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/data-quality/marquez_ge.png)

> ## Example: Comparing SQL Check operators and GreatExpectations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example: Comparing SQL Check operators and Great Expectations
```

> This example shows the steps necessary to perform the same set of data quality checks with SQL Check operators and with GreatExpectations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows the steps necessary to perform the same set of data quality checks with SQL Check operators and with Great Expectations.
```

The checks performed for both tools are:

- "MY_DATE_COL" has only unique values
- "MY_DATE_COL" has only values between 2017-01-01 and 2022-01-01
- "MY_TEXT_COL" has no null values
- "MY_TEXT_COL" has at least 10 distinct values
- "MY_NUM_COL" has a minimum value between 90 and 110
- `example_table` has at least 1000 rows
- The the value in each row of "MY_COL_1" plus the value of the same row in "MY_COL_2" is equal to 100
- "MY_COL_3" contains only the values `val1`, `val2`, `val3` and `val4`

### Example: SQL Check Operators

The example DAG below consists of 3 tasks:

> - First the `SQLColumnCheckOperator` is used to perform checks on several columns in the target table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- First, the `SQLColumnCheckOperator` is used to perform checks on several columns in the target table.
```

> - Afterwards two `SQLTableCheckOperator`s perform one check each that involves several columns or the whole table respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Next, two `SQLTableCheckOperator`s perform one check each that involves several columns or the whole table respectively.
```

> - Lastly the `SQLCheckOperator` is used to make sure a categorical variable is set to one of 4 options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Finally, the `SQLCheckOperator` is used to make sure a categorical variable is set to one of 4 options.
```

> While this example shows all the checks being written within the python file defining the DAG, of course it is possible to modularize commonly used checks and SQL statements in separate files (for Astro CLI users, those files can be put into the `/include` directory).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this example shows all the checks being written within the Python file defining the DAG, it is possible to modularize commonly used checks and SQL statements in separate files (for Astro CLI users, those files can be put into the `/include` directory).
```

            "my_column_comparison_check": {
                "check_statement": "MY_COL_1 + MY_COL_2 = 100"
            }
        }
    )

    # SQLCheckOperator example: ensure categorical values in MY_COL_3
    # are one of a list of 4 options
    check_val_in_list = SQLCheckOperator(
        task_id="check_today_val_in_bounds",
        conn_id=example_connection,
        sql="""
                WITH

                not_in_list AS (

                SELECT COUNT(*) as count_not_in_list
                FROM {{ params.db_to_query }}.{{ params.schema }}.\
                     {{ params.table }}
                WHERE {{ params.col }} NOT IN {{ params.options_tuple }}
                )

                SELECT
                    CASE WHEN count_not_in_list = 0 THEN 1
                    ELSE 0
                    END AS testresult
                FROM not_in_list
            """,
        params={"db_to_query": example_database,
                "schema": example_schema,
                "table": example_table,
                "col": "MY_COL_3",
                "options_tuple": "('val1', 'val2', 'val3', 'val4')"
                }
    )
```

### Example: GreatExpectations

> The following example runs the same data quality checks as the SQL Check operators example against the same database. After setting up the GreatExpectations instance with all four components, the checks can be defined in JSON format to form one Expectation Suite.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example runs the same data quality checks as the SQL Check operators example against the same database. After setting up the Great Expectations instance with all four components, the checks can be defined in JSON format to form one Expectation Suite.
```

> > **Note**: Running the same checks is possible because for each of the checks in this example an `Expectation` already exists. This is not always the case and especially for more complicated checks you may need to define a [custom expectation](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/guides/expectations/creating_custom_expectations/overview).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note**: For each of the checks in this example, an `Expectation` already exists. This is not always the case, and for more complicated checks you may need to define a [custom expectation](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/guides/expectations/creating_custom_expectations/overview).
```

      "kwargs": {
        "column": "MY_NUM_COL",
        "min_value": 90,
        "max_value": 110
      },
      "meta": {}
    },
    {
      "expectation_context": {
        "description": "the table has at least 1000 rows"
      },
      "expectation_type": "expect_table_row_count_to_be_between",
      "ge_cloud_id": null,
      "kwargs": {
        "min_value": 1000
      },
      "meta": {}
    },
    {
      "expectation_context": {
        "description": "for each row MY_COL_1 plus MY_COL_2 is = 100"
      },
      "expectation_type": "expect_multicolumn_sum_to_equal",
      "ge_cloud_id": null,
      "kwargs": {
        "column_list": ["MY_COL_1", "MY_COL_2"],
        "sum_total": 100
      },
      "meta": {}
    },
    {
      "expectation_context": {
        "description": "MY_COL_3 only contains values from a defined set"
      },
      "expectation_type": "expect_column_values_to_be_in_set",
      "ge_cloud_id": null,
      "kwargs": {
        "column": "MY_COL_3",
        "value_set": ["val1", "val2", "val3", "val4"]
      },
      "meta": {}
    }
  ],
  "ge_cloud_id": null,
  "meta": {
    "great_expectations_version": "0.15.14"
  }
}
```

> The corresponding DAG code shows how all checks are run within one task using the `GreatExpectationsOperator`. Only the root directory of the data context and the checkpoint name have to be provided. It is important to note that to use XComs with the `GreatExpectationsOperator` it is necessary to enable XCOM pickling as described in the more in-depth [GreatExpectations](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-great-expectations/) guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The corresponding DAG code shows how all checks are run within one task using the `GreatExpectationsOperator`. Only the root directory of the data context and the checkpoint name have to be provided. It is important to note that to use XComs with the `GreatExpectationsOperator` it is necessary to enable XCOM pickling as described in the more in-depth [Great Expectations](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-great-expectations/) guide.
```

```python
from airflow import DAG
from datetime import datetime

from great_expectations_provider.operators.great_expectations import (
  GreatExpectationsOperator
)

with DAG(
    schedule_interval=None,
    start_date=datetime(2022,7,1),
    dag_id="ge_example_dag",
    catchup=False,
) as dag:

    # task running the Expectation Suite defined in the json above
    ge_test = GreatExpectationsOperator(
        task_id="ge_test",
        data_context_root_dir="/usr/local/airflow/include/great_expectations",
        checkpoint_name="my_checkpoint",
        do_xcom_push=False
    )
```

## Conclusion

> Data quality is important which is reflected in the growth of tools designed to perform data quality checks. Commitment to data quality requires in-depth planning and collaboration between data professionals. What kind of data quality your organization needs will depend on your unique use case, which you can explore using the steps outlined in this guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The growth of tools designed to perform data quality checks reflect the importance of ensuring data quality in production workflows. Commitment to data quality requires in-depth planning and collaboration between data professionals. What kind of data quality your organization needs will depend on your unique use case, which you can explore using the steps outlined in this guide.
```

> SQL Check operators offer a way to define your checks directly from within the DAG with no other tools necessary. If you run many checks on different databases you may benefit from using a more complex testing solution like GreatExpectations or Soda.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SQL Check operators offer a way to define your checks directly from within the DAG, with no other tools necessary. If you run many checks on different databases, you may benefit from using a more complex testing solution like Great Expectations or Soda.
```

> No matter which tool is used it is possible orchestrate the checks from within an Airflow DAG which makes downstream actions depending on the outcome of the checks possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No matter which tool is used, it is possible orchestrate the checks from within an Airflow DAG, which makes downstream actions depending on the outcome of the checks possible.
```

---
title: "Data Quality and Airflow"
description: "Improve the quality of your data using Airflow"
date: 2022-07-12T00:00:00.000Z
slug: "data-quality"
heroImagePath: null
tags: ["SQL", "GreatExpectations", "Data Quality"]
---

## Overview

Ensuring the quality of your data is a prerequisite to getting actionable insights from your data pipelines. Airflow offers a variety of possibilities to orchestrate data quality checks directly from within your DAG.

In this guide we will cover:

- Best practices and essential knowledge surrounding the planning of a data quality approach.
- When to implement data quality checks.

> - How to chose a data quality check tool.

Author: oops, thanks. (I can hear my old English teacher sigh in the distance)

- Two different tools used for data quality checks with their requirements and logging capabilities.
- How Data Lineage is connected to data quality.
- An example showing the same set of data quality checks implemented using two different tools.

## Assumed Knowledge

> To get the most out of this guide you should be familiar with basic Airflow concepts such as [operators](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/what-is-an-operator) and [connections](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/connections/). Since you will be running data quality checks against a relational database, general familiarity with the structure of a database and data types will be assumed.

Reviewer: I put an assumed knowledge section in the intro to dags rewrite, so let's wait to get Jake's input on formatting and then edit this one to match (I'm assuming we'll want to bullet format, but don't want to make you edit if Jake has another opinion and we'd have to change it).

Author: SInce it isn't a big change and I cannot imagine Jake being _against_ bullet format I changed it already 😅

> **Note**: If this is your first time using Airflow we recommend starting with the [Introduction to Apache Airflow](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/intro-to-airflow) guide.

## Data Quality Essentials

What is considered good in terms of data quality is very use case dependent. Defining quality criteria for a given collection of datasets is often a task requiring collaboration with all data professionals involved with any part of the pipeline.

While this process is highly individual it can be divided into general steps:

1. Assess where and in what formats relevant data is stored and where it moves along your pipeline (this step can be assisted by using a data lineage tool).
2. Gather the data quality needs of data professionals using the data directly and indirectly.
3. Determine what quality checks should be run on which level of the data.
4. Determine where those quality checks should occur in your pipeline.
5. Define the process a check failure should trigger.
6. Choose a data quality tool (see 'Tools').
7. Write the checks.
8. Test the checks.

> ### Data Storage and Data Formats

Reviewer: This is obviously relevant here, but I'm wondering if this section is almost too high level for this guide (e.g. we can assume that anybody reading this already knows this part)? Open to other opinions here, but if we need to cut down on length at all I'd say going right into Data Quality Needs and Types of Data Quality Checks after the general steps would be fine.

Author: That makes sense yeah, especially since we explicitly list Relational DBs as assumed knowledge. I'm leaving it in for   now but open to deleting it.

### Data Quality Needs and Types of Data Quality Checks

Data quality needs will differ between professionals using the data and can even be at odds sometimes, in which case you might consider creating additional tables for more constrained use cases.

Data quality checks can be run on different levels:

- **Column**: e.g. confirming uniqueness of a key column, restricting the amount of `NULL` values that are allowed, define logical bounds for numeric or date columns or defining valid options for categorical variables.
- **Row**: e.g. restricting the amount of `NULL` values that are allowed in a row, defining the number of rows expected to exist for a certain timeframe.
- **Table**: e.g. checking against a template schema to verify that it has not changed.
- **Over several tables**: e.g. creating logical checks like making sure a customer marked as 'inactive' has no purchases listed in any of the other tables.

It is also important to distinguish the two types of Data Integrity Control:

> - **Flow Control**: monitors incoming data on a record-by-record basis and will sometimes prevent single records that fail certain data quality checks from entering the database. A well known tool for flow control is [Monte Carlo](https://docs.getmontecarlo.com/).

Reviewer: I agree, let's not call out Monte Carlo. Instead, I would just say something along the lines of "we're not covering flow control in this guide"

> - **Flow Control**: monitors incoming data on a record-by-record basis and will sometimes prevent single records that fail certain data quality checks from entering the database. A well known tool for flow control is [Monte Carlo](https://docs.getmontecarlo.com/).

Author: Good points! removed Monte Carlo

There are different tools that can be used to check data quality from an Airflow DAG. In this section we will highlight the two tools that also integrate with OpenLineage with concrete examples:

- **[SQL Check operators](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-sql-data-quality-tutorial)**: a group of operators allowing the user to define data quality checks in python dictionaries and SQL directly from within the DAG.
- **[GreatExpectations](https://greatexpectations.io/)**: an open source data validation framework where checks are defined in json format. Airflow offers a provider package including the `GreatExpectationsOperator` for easy integration.

Other tools that can be used for data quality checks are:

- [Soda](https://docs.soda.io/): an open source data validation framework that uses YAML to define checks which can be kicked off using the `BashOperator`. Soda also offers the ability to write any custom checks using SQL.
- [dbt test](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/building-a-dbt-project/tests): If you are using Airflow to orchestrate dbt jobs you might be able to implement data quality checks by using the `BashOperator` to kick of the dbt test command.

### Choosing a tool

> Which tool to choose comes down to individual business needs and preferences. We recommend to use SQL Check operators if you want to:

Reviewer: Our style guide disagrees on this one: https://www.notion.so/astronomerio/Astronomer-Style-Guide-5d2389d462734e149d2e66a5cf606228#47360bdaf54a4f2190cf2faa61ff2236

Only capitalize when referring to a specific instance of an operator. (I'm still trying to learn all this stuff, but we're going to need to make everything consistent during the migration).

> Which tool to choose comes down to individual business needs and preferences. We recommend to use SQL Check operators if you want to:

Reviewer 3: My only hangup is that it is referencing a set of operators (that I think it looks bad I understand isn't a compelling argument), and may make more sense to then put them in a code block and reference them as `SQL*CheckOperator`s or something like that.

> Which tool to choose comes down to individual business needs and preferences. We recommend to use SQL Check operators if you want to:

Reviewer: yeah this is kind of an in-between case. can always see what Jake thinks

> - write checks without needing to set up software additionally to Airflow.

Author: this definitely did not prompt me to go back to change "Dbt" to "dbt" 👀

- write checks as Python dictionaries and in SQL.

> - be able to use any existing SQL statement that returns a single row of booleans as a data quality check.

Reviewer: Somebody asked about this (sort of) in the LIVE we did yesterday. So it's relevant to at least one person!

> - be able to use any existing SQL statement that returns a single row of booleans as a data quality check.

Author: It was somewhat relevant for me to know that for the weirder checks I created (for example the one calculating percentile ranks and comparing values of the last day against that), but not in the sense of already having the SQL ready. 

I deleted the "existing", does that work?

- you want to collect the results of your data quality checks in a central place.
- you prefer to write checks in JSON (GreatExpectations) or YAML (Soda) format.
- most or all of your checks can be implemented by the predefined checks of the solution of your choice.
- you want your data quality checks abstracted away from the DAG code.

> **Note**: Currently only SQL Check operators and GreatExpectations offer Data Lineage extraction.

### SQL Check Operators

> **Note**: You can find more details and examples on SQL Check Operators as well as example logs in the ['Airflow Data Quality Checks with SQL Operators' guide](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-sql-data-quality-tutorial/).

SQL Check Operators execute a SQL statement that results in a boolean. `True` leads to the check passing and the task being labelled as successful. `False` or any error when the statement is executed causes the failure of the task. Before using the operator you need to define the [connection](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/connections/) to your data storage from the Airflow UI or via an external secrets manager.

> The SQL Check Operators work with any backend solution that accepts SQL queries and differ in what kind of data quality checks they can perform and how they are defined:

Author: does "supports Airflow" work too? 🙂

- [`SQLColumnCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/common-sql/modules/sqlcolumncheckoperator): Allows quick definition of many checks on whole columns of a table using a python dictionary.
- [`SQLTableCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/common-sql/modules/sqltablecheckoperator): Can run aggregated and non-aggregated statements involving several columns of a table.
- [`SQLCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/sqlcheckoperator): Can be used with any SQL statement that returns a single row of booleans.
- [`SQLIntervalCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/sqlintervalcheckoperator): Runs checks against historical data.
- [`SQLValueCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/sqlvaluecheckoperator): Compares the result of a SQL query against a value with or without a tolerance window.
- [`SQLThresholdCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/sqlthresholdcheckoperator): Compares the result of a SQL query against upper and lower thresholds which may also be described as SQL queries.

> #### SQL Check operators: Requirements

Reviewer: I don't think we need a separate section for this. Let's add a sentence before the list of operators that says that they're part of the common SQL provider and link to the registry.

To use SQL Check operators no additional software is needed. The `SQLColumnCheckOperator` and `SQLTableCheckOperator` are part of the [Common SQL provider](https://pypi.org/project/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/1.0.0/), which can be installed with:

```bash
pip install apache-airflow-providers-common-sql
```

The other SQL check operators are built into core Airflow and do not require  separate package installation.

> #### SQL Check operators: Logs

Reviewer: Same comment here about not needing a separate section. I don't think it would hurt to briefly mention that check results can be found in the task logs, but for this overview guide I don't think we need actual log excerpts since we link to the more detailed implementation guide that goes through all of that.

Reviewer: Ah, just saw your comment about adding this section recently. Did somebody ask for this specifically (sorry if I'm just forgetting!)? If I'm telling you to take out something that somebody else asked you to include let me know and we can chat about it :)

Author: No, this wasn't specifically ask for. I added the section here to get symmetry between the subsections of the GE and SQL Check sections. Deleted the section in favor of a small sentence. 🙂

[2022-08-02, 05:55:58 UTC] {connection.py:876} INFO - This connection is in OCSP Fail Open Mode. TLS Certificates would be checked for validity and revocation status. Any other Certificate Revocation related exceptions or OCSP Responder failures would be disregarded in favor of connectivity.
[2022-08-02, 05:55:58 UTC] {connection.py:894} INFO - Setting use_openssl_only mode to False
[2022-08-02, 05:56:00 UTC] {cursor.py:710} INFO - query: [SELECT MIN(my_row_count_check),MIN(my_column_sum_comparison_check) FROM (SELECT ...]
[2022-08-02, 05:56:01 UTC] {cursor.py:734} INFO - query execution done
[2022-08-02, 05:56:01 UTC] {connection.py:507} INFO - closed
[2022-08-02, 05:56:01 UTC] {connection.py:510} INFO - No async queries seem to be running, deleting session
[2022-08-02, 05:56:01 UTC] {sql.py:301} INFO - Record: (1, 1)
[2022-08-02, 05:56:01 UTC] {sql.py:315} INFO - All tests have passed
[2022-08-02, 05:56:01 UTC] {taskinstance.py:1415} INFO - Marking task as SUCCESS. dag_id=sql_check_example_dag, task_id=table_checks, execution_date=20220802T055539, start_date=20220802T055557, end_date=20220802T055601

> ```

Author: True, though I followed Kenten's suggestion to not put logs here since it is redundant with the more in depth guide on SQL Check operators where we do show both a success and failure log. 🙂

### GreatExpectations

> **Note**: You can find more information on how to use GreatExpectations with Airflow in the ['Integrating Airflow and Great Expectations' guide](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-great-expectations/).

GreatExpectations is an open source data validation framework that allows the user to define multiple lists of data quality checks called 'Expectations Suite's as a json file. The checks can be run from any position in the DAG using the [`GreatExpectationsOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/great-expectations/modules/greatexpectationsoperator).

> **Note** All currently available expectations can be discovered on the [GreatExpectations website](https://greatexpectations.io/expectations).

> #### GreatExpectations: Requirements

Reviewer: Let's roll this into the ### level section above

To use GreatExpectations you will need to install the open source GreatExpectations software and set up a GreatExpectations project with at least one instance of each of the following components:

- Data Context
- Datasource
- Expectation Suite
- Checkpoint

The GreatExpectations documentation offers a [step-by-step tutorial](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/tutorials/getting_started/tutorial_overview) for this setup.  

Additionally the GreatExpectations provider package has to be installed with:

```bash
pip install airflow-provider-great-expectations
```

> #### GreatExpectations: Logs

Reviewer: Same as for SQL checks, I think it's worth mentioning the logging since you're using that as a distinguishing factor between the two tools, but I don't know that we need a whole section or a screenshot (would reserve that level of detail for the GE-specific guide)

For the GreatExpectationsOperator OpenLineage receives whether or not the whole Expectation suite succeeded or failed:

![Marquez GreatExpectationsOperator](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/data-quality/marquez_ge.png)

## Example: Comparing SQL Check operators and GreatExpectations

This example shows the steps necessary to perform the same set of data quality checks with SQL Check operators and with GreatExpectations.

The checks performed for both tools are:

- "MY_DATE_COL" only has unique values
- "MY_DATE_COL" only has values between 2017-01-01 and 2022-01-01
- "MY_TEXT_COL" has no null values
- "MY_TEXT_COL" has at least 10 distinct values
- "MY_NUM_COL" has a minimum value between 90 and 110
- `example_table` has at least 1000 rows
- The the value in each row of "MY_COL_1" plus the value of the same row in "MY_COL_2" is equal to 100
- "MY_COL_3" only contains the values `val1`, `val2`, `val3` and `val4`

### Example: SQL Check Operators

The example DAG below consists of 3 tasks:

- First the `SQLColumnCheckOperator` is used to perform checks on several columns in the target table.

> - Afterwards two `SQLTableCheckOperator`s perform one check each that involves several columns or the whole table respectively.

Author: Yeah, I'll also try to remember that this needs an update probably soon! 🙂

      "ge_cloud_id": null,
      "kwargs": {
        "column_list": ["MY_COL_1", "MY_COL_2"],
        "sum_total": 100
      },
      "meta": {}
    },
    {
      "expectation_context": {
        "description": "MY_COL_3 only contains values from a defined set"
      },
      "expectation_type": "expect_column_values_to_be_in_set",
      "ge_cloud_id": null,
      "kwargs": {
        "column": "MY_COL_3",
        "value_set": ["val1", "val2", "val3", "val4"]
      },
      "meta": {}
    }
  ],
  "ge_cloud_id": null,
  "meta": {
    "great_expectations_version": "0.15.14"
  }
}
```

The corresponding DAG code shows how all checks are run within one task using the `GreatExpectationsOperator`. Only the root directory of the data context and the checkpoint name have to be provided. It is important to note that to use XComs with the `GreatExpectationsOperator` it is necessary to enable XCom picking as described in the more in-depth [GreatExpectations guide](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-great-expectations/).

```python
from airflow import DAG
from datetime import datetime

from great_expectations_provider.operators.great_expectations import (

>   GreatExpectationsOperator)

Reviewer 3: for the love of the almighty put that closing parenthesis on its own line!!!!

Author: 😅 

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/90063506/182831346-c4486b3b-d379-4426-8f58-33382679172a.png)

Reviewer 3: 😂 

Just run `black` on everything! No need to learn style when a machine will do it for you lol

with DAG(
    schedule_interval=None,
    start_date=datetime(2022,7,1),
    dag_id="ge_example_dag",
    catchup=False,
) as dag:

    # task running the Expectation Suite defined in the json above
    ge_test = GreatExpectationsOperator(
        task_id="ge_test",
        data_context_root_dir="/usr/local/airflow/include/great_expectations",
        checkpoint_name="my_checkpoint",

>         do_xcom_push = False

Reviewer 3: remove spaces around `=`

Author: note to self: lint code that goes into guides

    )
```

## Conclusion

> Data quality is important which is reflected in growth of tools designed to perform data quality checks. In-depth planning and collaborative exploration of what kind of data quality needs your organization is paramount in order to define checks to run and select the tools that are right for you.

Reviewer 3: in the growth of

Reviewer 3: what kind of data quality needs your organization --> what kind of data quality your organization needs

Reviewer 3: Second sentence is wordy, I'd re-work it

Author: I turned it into two sentences:

"Commitment to data quality requires in-depth planning and collaboration between data professionals. What kind of data quality your organization needs will depend on your unique use case, which you can explore using the steps outlined in this guide."

> SQL Check operators offer a way to define your checks directly from within the DAG with no other tools necessary. If you run many checks on different databases you may profit from trialing a more complex testing solution like GreatExpectations or Soda.

Reviewer 3: capitalize operators!!

Reviewer 3: profit --> benefit

Reviewer 3: trialing --> using
